---
title: 'Retrieval augmented scientific claim verification'
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/liu-2024-cliver
excerpt: '...We developed CliVER, an end-to-end scientific Claim VERification system that leverages retrieval-augmented techniques to automatically retrieve relevant clinical trial abstracts, extract pertinent sentences, and use the PICO framework to support or refute a scientific claim'
date: 2024-02-21
venue: 'JAMIA Open'
paperurl: 'https://academic.oup.com/jamiaopen/article/7/1/ooae021/7612234'
citation: 'H Liu, A Soroush, JG Nestor, E Park, B Idnay, Y Fang, J Pan, S Liao, M Bernard, Y Peng, C Weng (2024). Retrieval augmented scientific claim verification'
---
_As large language models (LLMs) are increasingly used for ideation and scientific discovery, it is important to evaluate their ability to generate novel output. Prior work evaluates novelty as originality with respect to model training data, but original outputs may be of low quality. In contrast, non-expert judges more reliably score quality but may favor memorized outputs, limiting the reliability of human preference as a metric. We introduce a new novelty metric for LLM generations that balances originality and quality -- the harmonic mean of the fraction of \ngrams unseen during training and a task-specific quality score. Using this framework, we identify trends that affect the novelty of generations from three families of open-data models (OLMo, OLMo-2, and Pythia) on three creative tasks: story completion, poetry writing, and creative tool use. We find that model-generated text from some base LLMs is less novel than human-written text from the internet. However, increasing model scale and post-training reliably improves novelty due to improvements in output quality. We also find that improving the base model at the same scale (\eg OLMo 7B to OLMo-2 7B) leads to higher novelty due to higher originality. Finally, we observe that inference-time methods, such as prompting and providing novel in-context examples, have a much smaller effect on novelty, often increasing originality at the expense of quality. This highlights the need for further research into more effective elicitation strategies as we use models for creative applications.
